# Neuro and behavioral stochasticity, variability, personality

#neuro #bib #freewill #behav #variance

#todo: describe Brembs' paper here!

Note: strictly speaking, in math, the term **stochastic** is very distinct from **chaotic**: chaotic behavior is generated by a deterministic system, while **stochastic** means that a system has some parameters or inputs that are assumed to be probabilistic. So stochastic has probabilistic inputs (and maybe outputs, although who knows), while chaotic has probabilistic outputs (or rather, outputs that can be, at the next level, analyzed as probabilistic). Biologists seem to be more lax in using these words, but mathematicians get really upset if these two are conflated.

Related:
* [[randomness]] - what randomness even is? How to define it?
* [[levy_walks]] - random exploration / exploitation in space, used by various animals during foraging
* [[moth]] - ultrasound avoidance in moths (free will)

Papers:
* [[Fraenkel1961woodlice]] - about how random motion is a good strategy
* [[Mitchell2002shell_games]] - about exploration / exploitation in small animals (similar to Levy walks described below)

Roberts, A., Borisyuk, R., Buhl, E., Ferrario, A., Koutsikou, S., Li, W. C., & Soffe, S. R. (2019). The decision to move: response times, neuronal circuits and sensory memory in a simple vertebrate. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 286(1899), 20190297.
There's a group of cells somewhere in the HB of young XL tads that keep recurrently firing for about 1 s after the mechanosens stimulus (even though shortest response is ~12 ms), and sometimes tadpoles still respond with this huge delay. Posit that this "noisification of response times" may be an evolutionary trick to make everything less predictable.

# Stochastic behaviors

https://jeb.biologists.org/content/218/9/1433
Portugues, R., Haesemeyer, M., Blum, M. L., & Engert, F. (2015). Whole-field visual motion drives swimming in larval zebrafish via a stochastic process. Journal of Experimental Biology, 218(9), 1433-1443.

Production of song in juvenile Zebrafinches:
* Kao, M. H., Doupe, A. J., & Brainard, M. S. (2005). Contributions of an avian basal ganglia–forebrain circuit to real-time modulation of song. Nature, 433(7026), 638-643.
* Fee, M. S., & Goldberg, J. H. (2011). A hypothesis for basal ganglia-dependent reinforcement learning in the songbird. Neuroscience, 198, 152-170. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3221789/
Young birds explore the song space, and their songs are highly variable. However this variability is not just "bad production"; there's a brain area (LMAN, one of the basal ganglia) that drives its variability. Spiking in this area is highly variable, and if you inactivate it, variability is gone.

Tervo, D. G., Proskurin, M., Manakov, M., Kabra, M., Vollmer, A., Branson, K., & Karpova, A. Y. (2014). Behavioral variability through stochastic choice and its gating by anterior cingulate cortex. Cell, 159(1), 21-32.	https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867414011076
They tricked rats into stochastic behavior by creating a competitive environment in which unpredictability was beneficial. Once all parameters were calibrated, the behavior was essentially unpredictable (from the experimenter's pov). Found that the cingulate cortex is the substrate.

# Individual variability

Jones, B. M., Rao, V. D., Gernat, T., Jagla, T., Cash-Ahmed, A. C., Rubin, B. E., ... & Middendorf, M. (2020). Individual differences in honey bee behavior enabled by plasticity in brain gene regulatory networks. Elife, 9, e62850. https://elifesciences.org/articles/62850