# o9

Parent: [[product_supply]]
See also: rulex, Kinaxis


A system (and a company) to …

A single process is called a **tenant**: a separate solution, with its own data (a separate data warehouse) and APIs. A small customer typically has 1 tenant, but a larger one, or one with very isolated projects, can have more than one, and have them connected. For example, demand planning and supply planning are often 2 different tenants, exchanging data with each other (demand pulling from supply). Sometimes one can also have different tenants for different regions. All tenants from one customer share an "environment".

* Preliminary steps, outside of o9; aka Customer Source Systems. Preparing the data, most of which is probably coming from SAP. Data lake, TPM (Trade and Promotion Management software), Staging files. Main engine are SQL queries orchestrated by some internal scheduler.
* Integration layer: a set of jobs ("running batches"?) designed to ingest and pre-process the data. Also some pre-defined scripts that come with the base system that can be modified.
* Main layer. A data warehouse ([[data_wh]]). A visual designer for data hierarchies, to prep data for reports (aggregate and disaggregate the data).
    * Some internal language (?) for writing rules for data transformation. Supports [[python]], R an JS scripts as well (as plug-ins, where scripts are just copied into a window). The binding between script variables and either eivironment data or user GUI, needs to be set manually (as "Settings"). Plugins can be either triggered by a user, be put on a schedule, or be triggered by a change in input data.
    * Front-end (for planners to work with): You can design reports with a native set of visualizations, tableau-style. Pivot table is probably the most popular tool tho.
* Outbound flow: extracting and loading to external systems. Typically, either a queue with a data lake, or an SFTP server with output files, then probably going to SAP again

An update (aka "reference model", or the default product to which all the customizatoin is added) is released every quarter. In the last few years grew from something simple and intuitive, but not too flexible, into something super-flexible, but also overwhelming. A clear trade-off is palpable. The current-looking version was introduced at around 2014. A fee for new developments + dedicated consultants within o9 (for most customers) + some of the biggest customers may have their own developers and analysts (working within the o9 framework).

The problem of releasing new functionality with these kinds of solutions: how to test it, if you can only really test stuff in a real business situation, and also, who pays for that? The status quo on the market is that features are released quite raw, and then customer team are encouraged to use them and report back the bugs.

Forecasting (sales → shipments → supply → production) is marketed (or at least pereceived) as one of the stronger sides of o9. A bunch of [[time-series]] models and rules (based on product segmentation) to potentially apply different models to different products and product groups. Which model to apply is decided based on prediction errors: essentially, a form of hyperparameter tuning. Typically forecasting at a fixed time increment, and that aggregated / split if needed. A DS pre-study is needed to come up with the best approach (estimating predictability of data + mapping the business processes).

For supply planning, a GUI interface to build a network. EKG - Enterprize Knowledge Graph; a set of rules for supplying individual codes (conditional, partial sourcing, alternative sourcing etc.) Then these rules run backwards through the network. The full graph can be gynormous (especially for manufacturing, where each product has lots of components).

