# I’m a Developer. I Won’t Teach My Kids to Code, and Neither Should You
By Joe Morgan

https://getpocket.com/explore/item/i-m-a-developer-i-won-t-teach-my-kids-to-code-and-neither-should-you

An example of a tragic take on CS education, that may sound reasonable at the surface, but actually doesn't make much sense. The author claims that one shouldn't teach kids to program, as syntax doesn't matter. What matters is problem-solving, and it is easier to teach in the real world (his example: fixing a chair, and making cookies).

What he totally misses, of course, is that in programming one doesn't engage with the real world, nor even artificial objects in the real world, but with logical constructs created by other people. Constructs that may be brilliant, or terrible, or (more often) - a mixture of both. Therefore, at least at the lower, primitive level, programming is mostly about hacking - about solving puzzles created by other people, that are known to have a solution. And you just need to figure it out.

Which is very different from "Real world" problems that typically don't have a solution, or at least you are never sure whether they do, and in many cases, what even counts as a solution.

And then of course there are the concepts of state, copying, information exchange between entities, following instructions, etc. that one has to internalize before they can even attempt to program.

To sum up, probably this can be considered a yet another case when a smart person, knowledgeable in one are, totally lacks awareness of their naivitet  in another, adjacent area (in this case - education). And so they end up making all sorts of wrong statements, but with a conviction. And in this case, the writing is also quite good, which is rather unfortunate, really.