# On student evaluations

See [[evals]]

#edu #notes

Student evaluations are just useless, period.

Look, why would you try to put a number to a course? There are only three different uses for this number, really:

1. Compare diff profs teaching same course
2. Compare diff courses taught by the same prof
3. Compare consecutive renditions of the same course, same prof, helping them to improve.

1 doesn't work because of known (and unknown) biases, such as biases against women and people of color. Biases that are there even if the course is given online, and the (fake) name is changed as an experiment! And then there are countless other irrelevant biases - accents, height, approaches to grading etc.

2 doesn't work because just having a course larger, or adding one mathy topic, or giving evaluations on a rainy day, changes the evaluations a lot. Similarly, different genres (like, electives vs required courses) are just simply plain uncomparable!

Finally, 3 doesn't work precisely due to OP's post: we, humans, are just too vulnerable, and students are too noisy, young, and inexperienced. If a person cannot (yet) count, how can you hope that they'll understand your grade rubric? If a person cannot (yet) teach or study, how can you hope that they would value your good assignments? In a controlled experiment, withdrawing feedback from randomly selected 50% of instructors actually (wait for it) helped them! As they didn't feel like shit all the time!

Don't get discouraged! But don't read your teaching evaluations (and I'm serious). Think of this comic. You are a good teacher, and you'll be an even better one, but for real, concentrate on those people who care to study. And collect your own feedback. Don't let them judge you, but ask targeted questions - did you like this? Would you like more of that? Did you work better with a deadline or without it? Half of these questions should make them students reflect on their learning, and realize that your practices actually make sense. Another half may be useful for you. For example, if you poll students, and get a 50/50 split on some question - for example, 50% say the course is too fast, 50% say it's too slow - it's a good thing to show them, to make it known that everyone is heard, and everyone are about equally unsatisfied, just in opposite directions. You feel better, they feel better, it's a win-win! But don't read evaluations :)

## What to ask?

And note that the situation with deadlines is a bit weird. If you ask young students (like 1st-2nd year undergrads) whether they need a deadline, they are likely to say "no", and then they fail, as deadlines help. And they'll be unhappy. So there are questions you actually don't want to ask, as students will naively vote against their interest :)

Asking questions is good in three cases:

1. When you genuinely need to know something. Like, have they studied something in school? Did they enjoy lab A or lab B better? How much time did it take them to do the assignments? stuff like that.
2. If you want them to think about something, and come to the conclusion that you know, but they don't yet know. For example, you can give them a deadline, and then ask them to reflect whether having a deadline actually helped them to stay motivated and organized.
3. In cases when you don't care, but it may help them. Say, you need to decide whether to make something due Monday or Thursday. What works for them would depend on their typical weekly schedule that you don't know, so you can offload this question to them, and they will like it (supposedly).

And in general, feedback helps. It helps you, and it helps them. As it makes them think about the structure of the course, and your pedagogical choices, it exposes some of your thought to them, and make them realize that you weren't doing stuff ad-hoc, but actually there was a reason why one topic went before the other, or you made them talk to each other, or you assigned groups at random, etc. They won't realize that it was meaningful unless you talk to them about that; and asking for feedback is one of the best ways to do it.
