# Romance of Egg and Sperm

Martin, E. (1991). The egg and the sperm: How science has constructed a romance based on stereotypical male-female roles. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 16(3), 485-501.

http://web.stanford.edu/~eckert/PDF/Martin1991.pdf

#language #society

A classic paper (1.5k citations) on how first the language used to describe the interaction of gametes was affected by social ideas about the role of male and female, and then in turn this created all sorts of metaphors. Compares the choice of words for male and female reproductive organs, with lots of example on how one is active, another one is passive; dance, courtship, romance, rejection, glorious competition, "perilous journey", "warm darkness" etc.

At the same time, the tone of the paper is quite angry, and often throws honestly good metaphors under the bus, together with the water. Even in this early paper, one can kinda see how the discussion aroudn the topic can totally go both ways. One, denying any attempts of imagery, as it can inadvertently plant wrong imagery in the heads of impressible readers; and perhaps another, seeking a more balanced approach.

Brings Woody Allen as the only example of timid and insecure sperm.

Then compares this to new research, that portrays the egg as active, but shows that the metaphors and the choice of words is often brought form the old, "passive" era.

Finishes with a nice statement that avoiding personification for eggs and sperms is not really an option, so the question is not about ruining explanatory values by trying to stick to machine-like comparisons, but about being cognizant about "what persons" they are imagined as.